Large Language Models (LLMs) have seen rapid advancements in recent years, enabling
a range of downstream applications including Question Answering and analysis over
structured and unstructured documents. Performance on these tasks has benefited
from the increased context lengths of newer open-source and closed-source models,
as these tasks benefit from incorporating a large amount of input context in order
to condition the model to generate particular outputs. However, deployment of LLMs
for downstream applications is constrained by inference costs, with LLM inference
requiring significant computational resources as well as memory capacity and bandwidth.

In particular, long context-length applications have large memory capacity and memory
bandwidth requirements due to the size of the KV cache, which increases linearly with
respect to sequence length. For many applications such as in-context learning,
document QA, and code generation, over a series of prompts a large portion of the
input context is fixed. This fixed context, which may contain system instructions,
documentation, or few-shot examples, is extremely beneficial for tailoring the model
to the target application. However, increasing the length of the fixed context poses
a significant challenge for inference efficiency.

We propose Squeezed Attention as a method to accelerate fixed context applications
by accelerating the attention computation. Our method accelerates inference by quickly
identifying which keys in the fixed context are important for a given query token.
Offline prior to inference, we cluster the keys in the fixed context based on their
semantic similarity and then represent keys from the same cluster using a single
representative key centroid. At inference time, when the user input is received, we
retrieve the important keys by first comparing the query tokens with the key centroids,
rather than the entire set of keys, in order to identify the important key clusters
for the current query. Once the important clusters are identified, we retrieve their
associated keys and compute exact attention only with those high-scoring keys.

Our method can be further extended to a hierarchical clustering and retrieval scheme,
efficiently narrowing the search space by first leveraging coarser-grained clusters
and then refining the search using fine-grained clusters. In contrast to existing
solutions that identify less important tokens once and discard them throughout the
entire generation, our method dynamically identifies and retrieves only the information
that is semantically relevant to each generation step. This allows our method to
preserve generation quality while reducing the number of KV cache entries loaded from
memory by up to 8 times, including loading key centroids.

The semantic-based key clustering and retrieval works as follows: to cluster
non-consecutive keys by their semantic similarity, we perform K-means clustering
offline, representing all keys within each cluster with a single key centroid value.
This allows us to identify semantically relevant keys for the query tokens during
inference by comparing the query against key clusters instead of the entire key set,
and only performing exact attention computation with the most relevant keys. Since
the number of key centroids is significantly smaller than the number of keys, the
memory overhead remains minimal. We additionally propose a hierarchical version of
our method, which can reduce the memory and computational complexity of the centroid
lookup from linear to logarithmic with respect to the fixed context length.

For our system implementation, we design efficient Triton kernels for performing the
centroid comparison and computing sparse FlashAttention with only the important keys.
Combined together, our method results in 4.3x and 4.2x speedups during the prefill
and decode phases when running inference with long fixed context. The kernel
implementation builds on top of prior work on Triton implementations for FlashAttention-2
and for dynamic sparse FlashAttention. The kernel uses a tensor containing key indices
to identify which keys need to be loaded from memory for exact attention computation.

We introduce PreFixQA, a document QA benchmark which contains a selection of arXiv
documents, each with many synthetic user input question and answer pairs. This
benchmark facilitates research into fixed context methods by allowing us to evaluate
various user inputs for each document. The dataset curation pipeline involves
collecting long documents from arXiv papers, and then collecting question-answer pairs
based on each document using a multi-step generation and filtering procedure.

We extensively evaluate our method on long-context benchmarks including LongBench,
RULER, and PreFixQA. On LongBench, our method preserves accuracy with 3.1x KV budget
reduction and achieves up to 8x KV budget reduction with 0.5 point accuracy degradation
for the LLaMA-2-7B-32K, LWM-Text-Chat-1M, and Longchat-7B-v1.5-32K models. The results
show that our method provides similar accuracy to the full KV cache baseline on long
context-length tasks, while offering significant efficiency improvement in terms of
reduction in KV cache loading and attention computation.

Furthermore, our method outperforms the QUEST baseline, with a pronounced accuracy gap
of up to 1 point for more aggressive sparsity settings. This highlights the advantage
of semantic-based clustering for identifying and retaining important keys. We also
include results for our hierarchical lookup approach, demonstrating how our hierarchical
method has lower overhead from the centroid lookup with minor accuracy loss relative
to performing a single-level lookup.

The QUEST baseline clusters consecutive KV cache entries and dynamically retrieves the
most relevant clusters based on their relevance to each query token during generation.
However, this approach relies on physical proximity for clustering, whereas clustering
should instead be based on semantic proximity, as tokens that are physically far apart
can be semantically similar. Squeezed Attention addresses this by clustering tokens
based on embedding similarity, ensuring that semantically relevant tokens are retrieved
for future generations.

In contrast with prior works which leverage vector search methods, Squeezed Attention
uses a fast centroid lookup to enable accurate retrieval of relevant contexts on the
GPU without requiring offloading operations to CPUs. Our approach is also able to
accelerate both prefill and generation phases. Furthermore, our method allows for
loading more or fewer keys from different heads, depending on the number of important
keys for each head. This approach enables us to achieve higher accuracy while
aggressively reducing the number of KV entries.
